Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lops. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Steve King. He's an independent researcher
in economics, as well as distinguished research fellow at
University College London. And today we're talking about his
latest book, Rebuilding Economics from the Top down. So,
Doctor King, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to have everyone.
Thank you for having me on.
So, of course, since we're talking about rebuilding economics
here, I guess we have to go back to
some of the basics and that's actually what we're
going to do today before we get into some
of the more complicated stuff. So my first question
would be, what is economics actually? I mean, what
does economics study and what is its role in
society?
I suppose the broadest definition would be to say
that it's the uh the study of the commercial
relationships between people in uh predominantly in market economies.
And uh and, and that allows almost any, any
form of analysis what we've had over the centuries.
There's a range of different paradigms that have approached
answering uh that, that question about how to commercial
uh systems function in different ways. And I'm a
staunch critic of the current system, which I think
is completely misleading about the actual nature of uh
of uh production exchange and distribution in a capitalist
economy.
So let's talk then a little bit about some
of the foundations of the current mainstream system or
even mainstream economics, even on an academic level. So
what would you say are perhaps some of the
main tenets of economics? And uh I mean, some
of its foundations that you tend to disagree with
the most.
The answer is virtually everything. Um The, the, the
starting point of the if you had to take,
pick what, what is the fundamental meme. We we
live in the day of internet memes and the
fundamental meme of mainstream economics is the supply and
demand curves intersecting supply and demand. It's far more
elaborate than that these days and how it's put
together. But that's the, the fundamental vision that every
uh person who accepts the approach to economics uh
users. And that argues that uh um a market
economy is uh one in which both uh you
can, you can calibrate uh market demand for each
commodity and market supply for each commodity. Market demand
falls as price rises, market supply rises as price
rises and the market system reaches equilibrium. And uh
and the the best possible situation is to allow
that to happen in as many markets as possible.
And the best way to do that is to,
is to avoid what they call market imperfections and
that largely amounts to government intervention and any form
of concentration of power. So that's uh uh against
unions and against monopolies. And that is the founding,
the founding vision of how capitalism functions and it
is not quite but almost totally wrong.
So let's get more specifically into that. Uh So
if I understand it correctly, one of the criticisms
you have here is that in mainstream economics, they
sort of derive their macroeconomic models from microeconomics, right?
So could you explain that? I mean, how they
do that and what you see as the main
problems there?
Well, the, the neoclassical economics, which is the, the
school of thought we're talking about fundamentally began as
a theory of microeconomics with the concept of general
equilibrium. And the idea is you had Marshall's idea
about how a single, a single market functions and
that's where we got the supply and demand curves
from. It was Marshall was the first one I
I believe the first one to draw a supply
and demand diagram and the footnotes to his principles
of uh economics. And uh and he argued that
that each individual market would reach equilibrium. Uh Volar
who was the one of the other major founders
of neoclassical economics, imagined not just one market but
uh a market for all commodities simultaneously. Uh WHICH
was with his idea was that you could reach
a general equilibrium where supply equal demand in all
markets. So those are the two foundation visions. Now,
when you take a look at at each element
of this, it fails either mathematically or empirically or
both. So for example, the idea of a a
rising supply curve is derived from the concept of
diminishing marginal productivity. Uh WHEN uh economists have ver
as they have done very, very rarely go and
ask individual firms what their cost structure looks like?
They get nothing like diminishing marginal productivity, they anything
they get increasing marginal productivity. So one of the
one of the elements is empirically wrong vars model
of how markets function was an abstract idea. Uh
THAT was extended from the Pa Parisian Bourse where
there were individual markets for each commodity sold by
the bourse. And he imagined bringing them all together
in one room. And that, that then involves effectively
matrix mathematics uh as as a as a by
product of trying to model the interaction of end
markets with n markets and mathematicians with no ill
will towards economics whatsoever. Uh Prove that the nature
of the matrix that was used in that is
such that the process is unstable, it doesn't reach
equilibrium. So we get all these elements where uh
what looks like when you, when you first put
the theory together looks like a well founded system,
in fact fails in the real world either for
mathematical reasons as in the case of general equilibrium
or see a sheer fact in the case of
the shape of the supply curve. Now that unfortunately,
the mainstream economists normally either don't know about those
failings or if they do, they ignore them or
they think that somebody has solved the problem. So
what's my problem in raising them? All of which
is false? Uh It's, it's a, it's a fundamental
set of problems, but they therefore believe you've got
to use that foundation to build macro now that
foundation itself is invalid. That's wrong. It simply shouldn't
be used. So why should you build macroeconomics on
the basis of a macroeconomic which is false. That's
the first element. The second is uh AAA large
system is fundamentally a complex one and complex means
that interactions between components uh are nonlinear and therefore
you can't do the type of editing thinking that
mainstream economists do. And no, it, it's, it's crazy
how pervasive nonlinear effects are in not just human
life but in the universe itself. Uh BECAUSE it's
easy for us. And this probably reflects our evolution
to think in linear terms. We extrapolate from here
forward. We, you know, if your income rises by
5% in one month, you extrapolate that forward for
5% every month. It just seems to be part
of human nature. Maybe that's how we work out.
The mathematics of throwing stones. God knows. Um BUT
we, we can't handle exponential processes. So we tend
to think in linear terms And that when you
can, when you think in linear terms, you can
aggregate from the individual element to the mass because
all your interactions are additive. So it's easy to
put them together. That way, when you have nonlinear
interactions, you can no longer do that, the, the,
the whole will be different to the sum of
the parts substantially. So, so with that level, you,
you, you, you cannot use for example, organic chemistry
to derive biology. Now, obviously, biology must obey the
rules of organic chemistry. But you can't then say,
well, I can take organic chemistry and I can
derive biology unless you can answer the question. OK,
what chemicals do you need to put together under
what circumstances to create life? Now, that question has
never been answered, probably never will be answered. But
that's equivalent to what economists think they're doing when
they think they derive macro from micro. Uh And
the best argument is was actually given by uh
a Nobel Prize winner in physics uh Philip Anderson
and he wrote a beautiful paper called Moore is
different. And the argument there was that the aggregations
of, of in individual entities behave in a way
that cannot be derived from the behavior of those
individual entities themselves. So economics hasn't got the memo
that paper was published over 50 years ago. So
I think over 60 years ago now, and economists
are still trying to derive a high level from
a lower level and the, the what what Anderson
described this as, as a perverted form of reductionism.
Uh Science has, has often tried to explain a
large level process by breaking it down into constituent
parts. He said that's, that's a reasonable, you know,
we've been achieved a, a large amount of success
that way, but we have never gone from the,
the micro level to the aggregate. Um In that
case, you would be using quantum mechanics to derive
Newton's uh inverse square law. No, we don't. We
take them as, as laws that apply in different
domains. So economists are 60 years behind science and
think they're think they're advanced at the same time.
And it it's just wrong, we have to derive
macroeconomics from macroeconomics itself. And that's one thing I'll
show you can do in that new book.
So let me just ask you specifically because I'm
not sure if you ended up touching on this
point specifically or not. But also for the audience
to get a better understanding of what we're talking
about here at a certain point there, you mentioned
something along the lines of we really not being
able to derive higher level processes from its individual
constituents or components. So does that also apply to
how in mainstream economics, people understand demand as the
sort of uh the market demand curve being the
horizontal sum of individual demand curve, something like that?
Yeah.
Yeah. And that's um that is something which you'll
find economics X books glossing over and often the
authors apparently are unaware of the complexities that are
involved in this. But when you think about how
an individual demand curve is derived, and this is
part of the instruction of any undergraduate student to
go through this process, you start from the assumption
of a set of immaculately conceived indifference curves which
relate, you know, consumption levels of two different commodities
to give you the combination of, you know, a,
a line of combinations which give you the same
utility. And then from that, you can go through
deriving an individual demand curve, starting with the assumption
that varying price does not vary the income of
the consumer that's vital. OK. Then when you go
to driving a market demand curve, the, the the
book, the textbooks just jump from the individual to
the market often without discussing the aggregation issue. A
group of mathematical uh economists beginning actually way back
in 1953 the year of my birth with a
guy called Gorman and then Samuelson in 56. And
then it was, this issue was rediscovered in the
late sixties and early seventies by Son and Sean
Mantel, Schafer de Bru and a few others. And
they s and they try to derive the market
demand curve from individual demand curve. And of course,
once you bring the market in, you have to
have everybody in the economy. If you're talking individual
demand curve for, for bananas in America, you have
a single person. If you're talking about the market
demand curve for bananas. In America, you're talking 350
million consumers, some of them are gonna be banana
producers, other banana consumers, etcetera, etcetera. So when you
vary the price, you must vary the income of
each agent in the system. And what that means
is that if you just think of just think
of uh graphically when you derive the individual demand
curve, you have a fixed point where you have
a, the, the, the assumed income and the assumed
prices of all other commodities. Apart from the one
whose price you're varying, it then vary the price
of the one on the horizontal axis while keeping
the point of rotation on the vertical axis fixed.
Now, when you say that there's actually price changes
will affect the distribution of income, you can no
longer do that, that point moves. And therefore, when
you then if you, you mentioned that for 350
million people individually, all of their little points of
rotation moving upwards and downwards with each change in
the relative prices, you do when you sum that
uh result, you can get any polynomial shape at
all. OK? And this, this and this was proven
particularly well by Schafer and Sonnenschein. If you find
a book called the, the handbook of Mathematical Economics
by Arrow and invigilator, you'll find their substantial chapter
on that issue and what they conclude with is
to say that the utility hypothesis, they have a
caveat at the end. But it's one of these
caveats that say if there are Martians, then maybe
other things happen. Uh But they, they basically say
the utility hypothesis tells us nothing about market demand.
Now, that is not what is taught in the
textbooks. They start from the utility drive the individual
wave wave of magic wand. Here's the market demand
curve in reality. Uh USING a derivation process, you
can get any polynomial shape at all. And the
reason for that is quite simple when you think
about it, the neoclassical vision of the individual does
not include their income. OK? It it it it
it it simply says takes their income as given,
doesn't say where it comes from and doesn't relate
that income to anybody else's income. If you look
at the classical school, they talked about capitalist workers,
landlords, some of them talked about bankers as well.
So the the the classification of individuals and the
social classes gave you a source of income and
also gave you a a nature of consumption as
well that was abolished by the Neoclassical. So they're
talking about isolated individuals. Therefore, they don't have any
information in their model of the individual in terms
of the distribution of income. So therefore, they cannot,
what actually happens when you change? When you make
something more expensive, the poor can no longer afford
to buy it. So demand will fall. But they
can't even reach that explanation because they've ruled out
individual income comparisons in their definition of microeconomics. So
consequently, they cannot derive a market demand curve. And
then on top of that, I mentioned the supply
early, we'll probably talk about supply more later. But
supply curve does not exist. Instead what happens is,
I mean, for example, I can, I can put
this across fairly simply, can you tell me the
market price for a car in, in, in France
right now?
Uh No, I don't think so.
There's no such thing is there, there's not a
market price for comma for pri there's first of
all, there's no such thing as a car. There
are many, many uh individual transport uh sealed three
or four wheeled vehicles, ok? But there's Lamborghinis and
there's pradas and everything else in between. So what
you have is, is a list price is applied
for each of those uh uh machines. Some of
those list prices completely exclude large parts of the
market, others anybody can afford. Um And they are
list prices which are which you either pay, take
the price or you don't uh you either buy
the Lamborghini at this price or you don't buy
the Lamborghini, you don't negotiate the vo down and
the price doesn't fall as the number of buyers
rises. The whole framework is simply wrong about how
a market economy actually functions. So we we, we
have a set of myths which are ingrained to
people. And this meme that I think it's very
important to think of it as a meme that
is a reference point which almost all economists exist
a accept, which does not exist in the real
world
also. Is it really the case? As I think
mainstream economics still assumes that individual consumers uh behave
as u utility maximizing individuals. I mean, isn't that
also an issue or?
Yeah, it's, it's another uh I gotta get another
case of, of just ignoring the obvious complexity in
the real world. Because if you, if you, if
you draw a utility maximizing consumer behavior on a,
on a textbook piece of paper, then it looks
like Varian and mascle and Mankiw and so on.
It's two dimensional paper is two dimensional. So you
have bananas on the vertical axis and orange is
on the horizontal axis. And then if you have
100 if you have, if you're gonna consider, you've
actually put numbers on the axis which you'll almost
never see. But if you do put numbers on
the axis, you might have between one and 10
bananas per day, let's say, and one and 10
oranges per day. Uh And that gives you 100
combinations. Now it's fairly easy if you draw a
line across that, which is, you know, diagonal line,
which is supposed to represent income, there's only gonna
be about five or 10 uh combinations of bananas.
And what did they use oranges um that, that
come close to that line. So you've got to
do about 10 combinations of cost and 10 combinations
of utility. It's a no brainer. It's very easy
to do. What happens when you want to include
anchovies in that list or toothpaste, etcetera, etcetera, you
have to add an extra axis. And each time
you do, you go from 10 to 100 to
1000 to 10,000. By the time you get a
six or so commodity, you've got a million different
combinations. Now, to show that physically, if you wanted
to simply go shopping with, you know, six, you
know, six different commodities with between zero and 10
units of each, you can fill a million shopping
trolleys with a different combination that enables you to,
to place and you're supposed to pick out the
one that maximizes your utility nonsense. Uh That is
cannot be the, the description of how people actually
behave when they go shopping at the local supermarket
where you might face 1000 or even 10,000 commodities.
There is no way you're, you're doing utility maximizing
to decide what to do. Instead, you use simple
old rules of habit, you buy what you bought
last time. Uh You have conventions. If you b
to a particular religion, you might not buy pork.
Um You know, things like this drastically reduce what's
known as the cursive dimensionality because the more um
our component, the more individual entities you think of
in a system, the, the number of combinations of
those entities rises hyper exponentially. So it is impossible
to compute that com that so-called utility maximizing and
what people instead do is they w what, what
Simons once described as satisfying? And a large part
of that is not considering all options but eliminating
the consideration of options. So that's real consumer behavior.
And as I said, you might know that there's
a German academic uh silt that did a wonderful
study back published in 1997 I think in the
economic journal where he attempted to test and show
his students their, their preference, individual preference curves using
uh Samuelson's idea of revealed preference and 95% of
them violated the axioms. And I think s actually
ceased being an academic economist after that experience. And
that's often the choice you face. If you actually
try to confront these theories against the real world,
you find they fail and you either ignore the
failure and stay in the classical economist or you
take it seriously and you cease being one.
So let me ask you now, then about more
of the supply end of things. So we've talked
about demand uh on the supply end of things.
What would you say are some of the assumptions
that mainstream economists bring into their models that you
think we should probably question
in supply theory of supply, the whole idea of
diminishing marginal productivity. Um THIS is something which is,
I think that the neoclassical model of production is
really just a remapping of the model of consumption.
Ok. Yeah. And you get utility from seeing different
commodities. Each energy one you add gives you less
extra utility that's reasonably. Ok. I mean, if the
first banana is ok, you try to feed me
10 bananas. I'm gonna kill you if you try
to put it the 11th down my throat. OK?
So there's definitely a diminishing marginal utilities to consume
more bananas in a, in a set time period.
Uh But to then think you can do that
in a factory. You know, you, you cannot throw
anything you like onto a blast furnace and get
iron ore. I get iron out the other side.
You've gotta be throwing in fairly precise mixtures of
iron ore and coal and, and, and o other,
you know, energy and so on to get the
output. So production is much more um stylized than
consumption, even consumption. We now know, you know much
more about the deep biological details of what we
need is inputs. If you don't throw um vitamin
C into your system, there's consumption, whatever else you
throw and you're gonna die of scurvy. OK. So
there are limitations. So tho those things aren't thought
of by the mainstream those things. Uh What, what
Paul Davidson, the, the, the lead great post keys
economist who died just recently, he called the, the,
the fallacy of uh universal substitution if you don't
have one thinking to substitute another. So for example,
if there's not oxygen inside this room, then I
can breathe nitrogen instead, I'll be dead in a
minute. OK? There are some things which are essential.
Now, when you look at production, as I said,
it's, it's incredibly uh stylized uh a production system
is not like your stomach, it did not evolve.
It's designed by engineers and engineers will design a
factory so that it reaches its maximum efficiency. When
it's being fully engaged, all machines are fully employed
inside the factory. And because you live in a
normally a growing economy, when you first build a
factory, it's gonna have at least 30% spare capacity,
if not 70 or 80% spare capacity. Because if
you accept growth and you build a factory which
is just big enough for the market. When the
day it's open, then you haven't done enough investing,
it's too small. So for all these reasons, the
the the factory below operates below full capacity and
you look at the empirical data, the highest level
of capacity, utilization of American economy during the boom
years of the sixties and early seventies was about
90%. Now, it's running about 8075 to 80% capacity,
but there's plenty of spare capacity there when you
expand production rather than getting uh putting more variable
units into each fixed unit past the point at
which you get the optimal output from that fixed
unit, you simply turn on more fixed units when
you have more variable units to operate them. So
there is and, and, and we get done inside
an overall factory, the efficiency of the factory's overall
systems, air conditioning, internal transport, etcetera, etcetera will improve
as you get towards that full capacity level. And
as you approach it, if the firm isn't sitting
down and deciding at the managing director level where
we're going to build the next factory, by the
time you reach 100% you're you you're planning too
slowly. So each mai each factory will, will have
constant. Uh THE variable cost per unit will be
constant and possibly falling. And that does not give
you diminishing mart productivity at all. It gives you
constant or rising. In fact, the whole idea of
Martha productivity is largely irrelevant. Uh And what you
get is a constant cost effectively when you uh
the per variable cost costing units cost of variable
units per unit of output for all factories. And
when the surveys have been done, the the lowest
level of discovery of, of firms having constant or
falling marginal cost. That's one of the implications of,
of, of of constant or rising marginal productivity uh
is 89% that was found by Alan Blinder in
1999. Normally I find 95% to 99% of firms
report constant or falling variable cost per unit. So
the whole theory, all that stuff is simply empirically
wrong. And the fact that it's still taught shows
that economics is fundamentally not an empirical science. It's
a, it's a, it's a, it's a, a set
of convenient fictions tied together and, and when, when
the fictions don't match reality, the adherents refuse to
look at reality.
So perhaps this is a good point to introduce
this question. Why is it that these ideas that
we've been talking about that are part of mainstream
economics have become the mainstream? I mean, and, and
why is it that if for example, someone who
is an economist is confronted with the fact that
the models he or she is using do not
really match up with the real world? I I
mean, why is it that perhaps they just ignore
it or they don't try to do things a
different way? I mean, is this uh what an
ideology or
it's an unconscious ideology? And, and I think it,
it, it you can't say that economists are different
from other disciplines on this front. This is this
is where the whole concept of paradigms came from.
That Thomas coon identified back on the the structure
of scientific revolutions back in the sixties. And uh
and what what humans do is that they develop
a AAA way of thinking about some aspect of
reality which becomes as coon called it their paradigm.
So the paradigm in astronomy before Galileo was the
to make paradigm. And that said the earth is
the center of the universe and the sun and
moon and stars rotate around it on perfectly concentric
heavenly spheres. And that dominated the discipline for 1500
years or more. And the, the, and the, the
real puzzle in the discipline was feeding spheres on
spheres, what are called epic cycles to explain why
the f what then the, the known four planets.
Though at the time, this is all we know.
This is back in the days when it was
only visual observation of the solar system, you could
see uh Venus Mars Jupiter and Saturn. OK. And
they were called the planets. Because in Greek, old
ancient Greek planet means wanderer. They would reverse direction
at various times in the sky. And to fit
that, that's where the, you know, the perfectly spherical
uh heavenly spheres had other heavenly spheres put on
top and rotating to basically give you a, a
empirical fit to the actual datum of the, the
movement of these four objects a against the pattern
of the, all the rest they could see in
the universe. Now, when Galileo invented the telescope, and
he was the person who made the first telescope
and he then trained it on the moon and
saw it at 10 times the resolution that it
could be seen with the naked eye, he saw
craters mountains and that was net that the heavenly
spheres were not heavenly spheres, they were distorted he
then looked at Jupiter and this, this took a
few more days of observation and he realized what
looked like stars behind Jupiter were actually planets orbiting
Jupiter. And so that was a complete challenge. Now,
how did the toll maker Soomer react? We have
documentary evidence from Gap Galileo and his correspondence with
Kepler. Did they refuse to look down the telescope?
They simply refused. Now, the reason being they in
a gut level, they knew that if they looked
down the telescope, they'd see something that challenged their
paradigm. And rather than doing it, they simply refused
to take a look. And that is the same
state as economists today. Now, the the reason that
we still have this happening in economics is twofold.
First of all, once someone discovered planets using a
telescope, anybody can discover planets using a telescope. So
the and and the planets never just never go
away, they're always there. Um So therefore the anomaly
that that presents to the um to make paradigm
is permanent and any new students coming along learn
of the anomaly, if any, any way before they
even learn about the paradigm. So it means that
you can have a bunch of old scientists lecturing
their students refusing to look down the telescope, trying
to explain the anomalies using the Tomac uh paradigm.
Students put up with it, but they know what
Galileo has done. And when the old fogy fogey
who's lecturing them, either retires or dies, the replacement
has to come from the student body. One of
the student gets the job and they say right
now, I'm going to use the telescope inside my
lectures and then they get, we get generational change
with economics that doesn't happen because the anomalies in
economics are either logical ones which frankly, economists just
either don't know about or they ignore, I can
get plenty of detail on that later or they're
a empirical event which you cannot reproduce. So there's
the Great Depression. When was the last Great depression
you experienced? Yeah. What were your feeling? How did
you feel during the Great Depression? You weren't even
born, your parents probably weren't even born. So consequently,
we forget these events and, and therefore another anomaly
comes along and, and, and the, and the you
don't and you never get that confrontation between an
irresolvable anomaly and the current paradigm. And the other
side of it is a bit like again, the
Tomac system with the way that got tied up
into the ideology of the Catholic church at the
time. So challenging to it was challenging God and
that's why Galileo was put under house arrest. Um
That in economics, the equivalent there is that the
neoclassical vision is of capitalism as a perfect system
equilibrium, you get your marginal products. It's a meritocratic
system with no concentration of power. Uh uh WHERE
you, you maximize utility subject to the constraints and
the cost of production and that is a vision
of a perfect society and there's something in humanity
that longs for perfection. We long for this ideal
system. That's why we get religious groups. And the,
the, um you know, there's actually a wonderful joke
that I saw from an Australian uh commentator at
one stage who was agnostic, obviously talking about a
say a dispute between a Muslim and a Christian.
And it's having an alien witnessing the dispute and
saying, so what you're telling me is that your
imaginary friend is better than his imaginary friend and
they're the same friends. I'm gonna leave this planet.
Bye bye. OK. So it, it, it's something about
humanity. We want that to system. So what happens
is, and this is, I've seen my own history.
I broke away from mainstream economics in 1971 when
my first year at university. Uh AND at the
time I was to some extent intimidated by professors.
I thought they must know more than I do.
I found out the hard way. They didn't um
they knew less in many ways because I read
more widely than they did. Um But the thing
is I didn't get selected to replace the professor
at Sydney University. Somebody else did and that somebody
else believe the stuff that I was seeing through.
And I knew how bright that other person was
and how broadly red they were and they were
trivial compared to me again. Not that I'm putting
myself up all that much. But I'm simply talking
about the con constraints that accepting a Siri puts
upon the range of things you will consider and
the issues you will read and so on. So
II I, you know, I, I no longer have
to respect my senior because I am the senior
these days, I've seen all these people come through
and they believe in a way that I don't
and the belief holds them forward. So what happens
is rather than generational change happening as happens in
science? The professor says that kid over there thinks
like I do, I'm not making my research assistant.
I might get him on my publication list. I
might get him a few paper. I might even
put him as bone primary author. Bang that guy
gets publication of the Economic Journal. He gets the
provision replaces um the professor and somebody that I
regard as a, as a, as a, as a
a well frankly a gym wet quite frequently. But
you know, some of the very limited perspectives, they
become the professor. And II, I find myself as
I as I got higher and higher academic ranking,
I went down to lower and lower universities because
only at that level did I find a university
when neoclassical weren't competing with me to get the
position so I could then dominate any of the
ordinary with my publication record and, and, and uh
and in the regard I'm held in I could
get those positions. I went from University of New
South Wales, which was the, was the second or
third ranked Australian University, the University of Western Sydney,
which is 20th or 30th but moderately ok. University
as things go globally to Kingston, which is ranked
about 8/100 in the global system and definitely is,
is a low, a low ranked university overall. Um
And that's the thing, the, the the people who
are critical of mainstream economics end up in the
lowest ranked universities. So ironically, if you want a
broad education in economics, don't go to Oxford, go
to a low rank university where you might get
some interesting uh alternative perspectives, put you away. But
that's that, that, that it's a long winded answer.
But the basic story is the, the, the ideological
role which they're not even conscious of it, just
the perfect system vision that it gives them plus
the lack of generational change. That's why economics remains
rooted in these ideas, which should have been thrown
out empirically speaking or logically speaking as much as
a century ago.
But doesn't this all also have real life consequences?
I mean, because people might be hearing this and
they might be thinking, ok, that's all fine. But
that's those are issues for the academics to deal
with. That's an academic issue in the realm of
economics. But isn't it that these models are the
ones that also influence political decisions, political decision making,
economic decisions more specifically and have or can have
political economic and social consequences.
Oh, they have huge consequences. This is why they're
so, if, if they were irrelevant, it was like,
you know, if we, if we're debating what poets
thought about uh about uh national infrastructure programs, it
wouldn't matter. Cos poets don't influence the policy, economists
set the policy. And like one of the most
obvious examples is the Maastricht Treaty, uh which is
it, it's, that's got an element above and beyond
neoclassical, that comes from what's called an auto liberal
uh uh framework. But the idea that public debt
is dangerous and deficits are dangerous uh is simply
empirically wrong and logically wrong. When you take a
look at the double entry bookkeeping involved in, in,
in government finances, the government is not borrowing uh
when it sells bonds, it's selling an asset uh
to banks to replace, which is an income earning
tradable asset to replace what used to be non
income earning and it's certainly nontradable. Uh So it's
no, in no way. Does it resemble you and
me taking out a bank loan? But that's the
perspective they put on it. And therefore what you
get is inadequate public services running down. Um uh
National Health, for example, is happening in the UK
right now in the belief that, you know, future
generations need to save the money. No, they don't.
They need decent health. So it ends up with
having severe impacts upon um the the quality of
life we we experience and it, it, it turns
up uh as well and things like how fast
do we recover from crisis? And where do we
have crises in the first place? So mainstream economics
and if economics was genuinely a science, it would
have predicted the possibility of a financial crisis because
it's a policy based science, we could have actually
prevented it. Instead, mainstream economists are completely ignorant of
the possibility of a crisis coming along in 2007,
2008, only uh econ class like me saw it
coming and warned of it. And so they led
us into a financial crisis and then the recovery
from it, if you look at what they advised
Obama to do, cos Obama walked into that crisis
when he became uh president in 2009. Um THEY
told him to give money to banks and banks
will lend out 10 times as much money you
give them and you've got a fast rate of
economic growth. When you look at the rate of
recovery from the 2008 crisis, it was the slowest
in recorded history so far from giving advice which
gets things makes things better, it ends up making
stuff worse. And that again is why it isn't
just an academic matter, it affects people's everyday lives.
So since you mentioned there, that was an eight
economic crisis, let me ask you a couple of
questions about that. Did it actually have in the
long run or even in the short term, any
impact at all on how people think about and
do economics
nowhere near enough? Um Like I, when I saw
the crisis coming, the, the day that I worked
out, the crisis was approaching was roughly the 18th
of December 2005, circumstantial reasons as to why. Um
But I, I thought, you know, there's, I looked
at the American and Australian data of private debt.
That's what I identified as the cause. And I
saw an uh exponentially increasing ratio of private debt
to GDP. So that can't continue when it stops
growing credit based demand will collapse and that will
cause probably the greatest economic downturn since, since the
Second World War. Um And I knew that if
I didn't get my argument into the public arena
before it happened, I wouldn't be taken seriously afterwards.
So there, that's one reason that I became more
prominent globally. And also you got things like the
rethinking economics movement, protest against autistic, economics, etcetera, etcetera.
All these various movements began, the Institute for new
economic thinking was formed so on and so forth.
So there were certainly a diversity of views came
out of that crisis. But the mainstream still can't
explain why it happened and what they've done gone
to, they've gone back to the same old models
they had beforehand, but they've had what they call
financial frictions. And this is the idea that the,
the, the way to explain why the crisis occurred
is to say that the financial sector imposes frictions
that slow down how rapidly we return to equilibrium.
Now, the whole idea of finance is a, is
a friction. I mean, it's a friction if you
wanna, you know, do something and you haven't got
any money. Sure. Uh But when it comes to,
if you've got some speculative idea, it's not a
friction, it's a lubricant. Um So the whole idea
that, you know, treating it as a way of
slowing down a return to equilibrium is just the
wrong way to think about it. So it, it
has led to uh more legitimacy for the sort
of approach that I take, it's led to a
wide diversity of views. So the mainstream is now
attacked from numerous sides now rather than just from
a handful of individuals like it was beforehand, like
me being one of them. Um So it has
led to a diversity of views, but the mainstream
has remained unmoved.
And so what do you think should have been
the best way to deal with the 2008 economic
crisis? Do you think that for example, instead of
bank bailouts, we should have put money directly into
the hands of households. And if so, could you
explain perhaps why that would have been better?
Well, the whole problem is caused by too much
private debt And if you look at the American
data, for example, private debt went from about 50%
of GDP in the aftermath of world war 2
to 100 and 70% at its peak. And this
was regardless of ups and downs of the interest
rates that just continued rising as a ratio of
debt to GDP. And a large part of that
was people being enticed into taking out mortgages because
we all, you know, believe, oh the house gets
more expensive. That's good. I mean, nobody thinks a
car is getting more expensive is good but houses
are getting more expensive is good. And so we
do is borrow money to buy the house. And
it's actually the process of taking out new loans
that actually causes that increase in house prices. We
really need to return to treating housing as a
as a long-term consumption good, not a, not an
investment, not a speculate, not a speculative asset, but
you know something you you need a house to
live in period. Uh And if that was the
case, the level of mortgage debt would fall from
say as a region of quite a few countries
fall from say 100% of GDP down to 20%.
Now we should use the government's money curating capacity
to enable that to happen rapidly. So I propose
the idea of what I call the modern debt
jubilee where the government would give everybody in the
country an identical amount of money. So Rupert Murdoch
would get the same amount that I would get.
Uh AND, but then you were required to pay
that off your debt. Now, Rupert Murdoch, $100,000 wouldn't
make a dent and his level of debt would
make a substantial debt debt in mine, dent in
mine. Uh So you give people that money, they're
required to pay the debt down. If they don't
pay the debt down, then they get uh cash
that they can either use to spend if you
want to encourage macroeconomic spending, or they could be,
have required to convert those into government bonds which
give them an income source. Um But so it
would be a, a univer uniform pattern across the
whole country and you would, that would increase the
level of recorded government debt. But that, as I
said, is, is an income earning asset for the
private sector. It's not a burden for the government.
It's a government giving you something which they then
were committed to giving you an income stream over
time. Uh So the government could easily do that.
And with that reduction in debt, say from 100%
of GDP to 20% of GDP, we'd had a
fall in house prices, but that would have been
compensated by the money individuals got per head and
housing will be more a more affordable and we
would have had a lower level of debt and
as it happens, and this is where the the
complex system side of capitalism comes in. When I
analyze the dynamics of a, of a complex system,
the type of work that I do in economics,
I have found that the increasing level of, of,
of, of, of bank debt causes a fall in
the share of income going to workers. Yeah, it's
actually a causal process. It's not even though workers
might if you imagine firms are simply borrowing the
money, which is what I model in my models
of v dosky financial instability hypothesis. Even with just
firms doing the borrowing and workers need to be
doing no borrowing at all. The dynamics of the
system are such that the workers share of income
falls precisely as the banker share rises. So rising
levels of private debt is more money to bankers
and less to workers. And that's one reason capitalism
is malfunctioning now, uh bankers don't spend their money
very rapidly. Workers, do you get a lower level
of economic performance out of that situation as well?
So I would have gone through modern debt jubilee.
Uh GIVE the money directly to households require those
having debt to pay their debt down. Put conditions
on how the money can be used by others,
which could be either buy bonds or if you
wanted to boost the macroeconomy, then just spend it,
spend it well. And that would have eliminated the
crisis and reduced the private debt level from its
current running roughly 100 and 75% of GDP down
to say about 90% of GDP. This is private
debt and that is more manageable. And we could
have got back to a, a stable situation, uh,
like the 19 fifties and sixties.
Mhm. So, uh, I'm going to get also into
some questions about that in a second also because
just a few months ago I had on the
show, your friend, Doctor Michael Hudson to talk about
his books on that exact topic. But let me
just ask you because earlier, when we were talking
about some of the foundations and assumptions of mainstream
economic mix, you mentioned briefly the fact that we
should move into a model based on complex systems
theory. So could you tell us a little bit
more about that? I mean, how would the economics
based on complex systems theory look like? And what
are some of the main ways it would differ
from what we have? Uh Now
complex systems take it as granted the systems don't
reach equilibrium. So the whole fetish on reaching equilibrium
would be thrown out. It's just isn't the way
complex systems behave. Uh The most obvious complex system
is the weather and the weather is never an
equilibrium. And with the, with the most uh famous
stylized model of the weather was done by Lorenz
um Edward Lorenz back in the early 19 sixties
and he built a, a three dimensional model uh
which is basically like having water, having a AAA
thin layer of water uh on a stove top.
And you're looking at the horizontal and vertical location
of a drop of water and the temperature difference
between the bottom and the top of the hot
plate. And that was an incredibly simple system, they
thought would reach equilibrium. And it didn't, it just
continuously moved it far from equilibrium positions. So throw
away equilibrium, OK. Equilibrium is a potential potential but
not a necessary uh feature of a dynamic system.
Uh But when you look at real world dynamic
systems, they have unstable equilibrium. So that's, that's your
starting point. So non equilibrium thinking dynamic rather than
talking OK to supply and demand curves don't have
time on the on the horizontal axis, they have
goods, they never actually say goods per unit of
time, etcetera, etcetera. So time sort of falls out
of the analysis. A complex system analysis is fundamentally
time based. So what you end up doing is
rather than using algebraic equations, which are when when
engineers take a look at what economists do, they
often choke. But they can't believe people are trying
to model a complex system like the economy using
algebraic equations. They say you've gotta be using differential
equations, equations to have change over time and one
system state affects another system state ciris Paribus, which
is one of these nonsense ideas. Economists will say
when they teach their partial equilibrium models, they say
assuming all other things remain constant nonsense, nothing else
remains constant. Everything affects everything else. But what we've
done with complex systems, mathematics over the last half
a century and this is completely passed, economic spy
is develop techniques to handle um systems where everything
depends on everything else. And then the question becomes
not, you know, what's the equilibrium going to be?
But do you have enough of the causal factors
in your model to cover the major ways in
which things depend on other things that matter? So
there's some things you wouldn't bother bringing in because
they have such a small impact upon the quality
of your prediction that it's not worth the extra
complication of including them. And that, that is the
way you pre approach building complex systems models. Uh
But that would be the nature of complex systems,
differential equations rates have changed through times non equilibrium
and looking at potential dynamic paths of a system.
And how do you bring the capitalist case the
most important question? How do you avoid it collapsing?
And when I, when I do that, one of
my mathematician friends do that, they find that in
the opposite conclusion to what neoclassical economists reach, it's
essential to have government spending because without government spending,
you can have a private sector collapsing into a
period of where GDP collapses, your private debt ratio
becomes infinite employment and wages share of GDP collapsed
to zero. That's a potential outcome of a system
without a government, put a government in there. And
it has what mathematicians call persistence. So it, it
ends with very, very different conclusions. But it, what
it involves is it's throwing away the old tools
that come from the 19th century, throw away algebraic
logic and do it with, with system dynamics and
con and continuous time differential equation models.
Do you think that perhaps one of the reasons
why mainstream economists uh are also a little bit
reticent when it comes to perhaps trying to include
complex systems theory into their frameworks and models is
that perhaps it involves more complicated mathematics or
they, they like to think they're good mathematicians, they're
good mathematicians with a very limited tool set which
is inappropriate for what they're analyzing. Um But I,
I think, you know what I find when I
teach my students, the approach that I use, they
get enthused by it. Um BECAUSE it, it is
a challenge of modeling a complex system and it's
exciting. So it, it, it's just that they don't
want the conclusion that a complex system reaches and
that those conclusions go against their wishes about how
they think capitalism should behave and they just turn
a blind eye to it. And I've become, I've
come to realize that when you challenge somebody's paradigm,
they just look for a reason to dismiss you.
When you say your model is not as good
as my model within an existing paradigm, then they
have a lively debate. So when you go outside
the paradigm, you lose them, they don't want to
even consider and they, and they will use stupid
arguments to dismiss your challenge to their paradigm. So
uh that's what really goes on. And therefore, because
complex systems end up with non equilibrium outcomes and
they want equilibrium to apply, they don't want to
know about complex systems.
Mhm. So, within a complex systems, sort of uh
economic paradigm, let's say, would it also include uh
cyclicality? I mean, would the economic in
a complex system is inevitably cyclical? Um Because to,
to be um like in mathematical terms, if you
build a a complex system with unstable equilibria, uh
then you will be forever migrating far from the
equilibrium. And the, the basic characteristic is that like
like the lo Lorenzo system has three equilibrium points,
uh one of which is stable along two axes
and unstable along a third. And they're all what
they called real axes. They had to give you
repulsion or attraction. But the other two equilibria are
stable along one axis with a, a real stability.
So there was the value of the of the
what's called eigenvalue is negative along that real AX.
But there are two complex axes which have positive
real parts. The complex axis gives you cycles where
you get out of it is as you approach
the equilibrium, you can from a distance away, you
can get attracted to one of these equilibria, but
as you get closer, you're repelled by it. So
what you get is a region around the equilibrium
where nothing ever, nothing ever penetrates and you're always
far from equilibrium and, and that is the nature
of a complex system.
Mhm. So could you give us perhaps uh a
couple of examples of uh economic phenomena that through
a complex systems theory framework, we would get a
new understanding of them. I I think that in
your book, for example, at a certain point, you
go through employment and wages and how they would
change over time and how we could model that
through complex systems theory. So how in what ways
would it look different from what we now have
in mainstream economics?
It's totally different because if you look at a,
a neoclassical dynamic stochastic general Caribbean model, what they
do is they set up a algebraic system to
generate a system of difference equations. Uh WHERE they,
they, they, in fact, the, it's the framework for
the, what they call DS G models dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium is that there's a future point uh
where of an equilibrium between capital output ratio, effectively
capital employment ratio and RR utility um satisfaction which
is unstable, it's a saddle. And so if you
imagine uh a saddle and you're trying to throw
a ball bearing, so it lands on the saddle.
The only hope you have is to get straight
in front of the nose or, or the arse
of the horse, throw the ball bearing and it
just gets just in that part of the ridge
which runs along the horse's mind never deviating over
the side. Uh And then of course, if you
change the angle of the horse, you've got to
move. So you're facing the nose once more. Well,
that fundamentally describes how they think uh cycles come
about. So you have a future of this point
and that's given current uh uh what they call
technology and, and preferences and then you have some
what they call shock to preferences in technology that
relocates this future location of the saddle. So you
gotta move to a new point and you move
that new point by changing your investment and consumption
today. Now that ludicrously complicated mathematically fraudulent approach is,
is what people do with Ds GE models. Mine
just simply says here's the dynamics uh the, you
know, the wages interaction with the employment rate and
uh and debt levels interacting with profit and so
on. And you're gonna get unstable, the equilibrium will
be either unstable um or, or or under some
limited conditions, stable under others, unstable and you'll cycle
indefinitely until you have a breakdown unless you have
government spending to counteract it. So it's very, very
different. And I can also, I I like again
what a DS G model will set it up,
put it in equilibrium and give it a shock
and see how fast it takes to convert you
back to the equilibrium. Again, um dynamic modeling, the
complex systems, you set up the overall system, you
might want to change parameters while you do the
simulation. But even with fixed parameters, it will cycle
indefinitely.
But so le let's say that we are talking
about employment rates and wages and how they change
over time. If we model them through a complex
systems approach, uh can we get, let's say perhaps
information in terms of how governments could deal with
situations where employment rates would be uh a bit
higher and wages would be lower. I mean, would
there be perhaps informed interventions to deal with those
kinds of issues?
One of the obvious ones for me, as you
don't have banks bearing too much debt, private debt
and certainly not for speculative rather than investment purposes.
But even if they're creating just for investment, you
can have cycle will lead to breakdown. So you
end up with a perspective saying the system can
breakdown, which is not neoclassical thing with, without government
invention, you'll reach equilibrium and it'll all be perfect
and they're trying to manage the damage the government
does to the system in the way of thinking.
From my point of view, a private sector system
without government almost certainly collapse into a debt deflation.
So if you bring government in, you're trying to
prevent that outcome occurring. One simple way is the
government spending actually counteracts. If it's done in a
counter cyclical fashion, counteracts the accumulation of private debt.
Uh The other way to go about it is
saying, well, we should be limiting what banks can
lend money for. Banking. Banks are not, you know,
but banks are not like making coffee cups. Ok.
Um, CO coffee cups. We, we, you know, we,
we, we, there's a, there's a physical use for
this thing with money you're borrowing and you're speculating
on making future profit. And if banks are providing
that money for industrial capital, then we're likely to
get new commodities, you and I can consume if
they're giving it to financial assets and pausing up
house prices, we have houses, we can no longer
afford to buy. So there is reason you don't
want private money to be created to finance speculation.
You want it to be financed for investment. So
you get a whole lot of range of different
policies about what you do about banks in that
particular situation. Uh And you'd also end up, uh
you wouldn't be necessarily crucifying monopolies. Uh Again, the
whole idea that monopoly is bad and competition is
good comes out of, of small competitive firms are
good. That comes out of the neoclassical vision of
diminishing marginal productivity and market demand curves falling, et
cetera, et cetera. That's not the real world. You
look in the real world. You found there's a,
in most industries, there's a what's called a Power
Law distribution. A few small firms have a large
part of the market. Lots of small firms have
a small part of the market that is part
of the evolutionary process that leads to innovation in
different industries. You want that structure to some extent.
And the monopoly rather than charging a low price,
a high price for a low quant quantity, which
is what you'll get out of the textbooks tends
to charge a low price for a high volume.
Uh BECAUSE again, the efficiencies of large scale production
and consumers actually benefit out of that. So long
as the firm doesn't then go and use its
market power to slaughter its potential rivals, which can
certainly happen. So you end up with a very,
very different vision of how to manage uh individual
corporations. Uh uh YOU know, corporate concentration, what we
get out of the neoclassical and you end up
with a desire to control the financial sector rather
than letting it rip. And one of the great
problems of the so called reforms under Maggie Thatcher
and Reagan, everybody who's followed in their footsteps is
there's liberate what they've libera liberalized is what the
finance sector can do. It's had very little impact
upon uh industrial corporations, but it's an industrial corporation
we want to have doing the innovation rather than
financial sector which innovates mainly to cause uh uh
asset price bubbles.
So let me ask you now then about uh
that uh earlier, when I asked you about the
2008 economic crisis. At a certain point, you mentioned
the possibility of uh us having done something like
a modern day jubilee. So, uh I mean, basically
what is debt, what generates debt? And when it
comes to uh I mean, having a jubilee, what
would it include, would it be just private debt?
Uh ALSO public debt? Uh And what about uh
for example, commercial debt? I mean, what kinds of
debt would we include in the possible jubilee? For
example.
Uh Actually, if you look back at the ancient
jubilees and Michael would have Michael Hudson would have
done this with you when he was on your
show. And ancient jubilees affected household debt, not uh
not business debt. So they write of household debt
and the reason for that often was household debt.
You know, you'd be, you'd run up a tab
at the, at the, at the mead hall and
you couldn't pay it, you'd buy, you'd borrow um
prior to a harvest and your harvest failed, etcetera,
etcetera, you ended up as a wage slave and
as slender as a wage saver slave working on
the landlord's uh property and, and forfeiting your own.
And then what would happen with that? That meant
was those societies were challenged because only Freeman could
be in the army. So the more um slaves
you had, the less army you had and that
challenged the existence of the empire. So that gave
you a countervailing reason why the uh the emperor
would want to cancel private debts. And that happened
fairly regularly of every change of king, every 49
years. If not, uh if a king lived for
50 after 49 years, that sort of thing, abolishing
those debts, which let people go back to their
land, abolished their situation of slavery and so on.
Now, we can't do that today. It's much more
complicated, but I would use what they call the
modern debt jubilee. And that would be using the
government's money creation capability to cancel private debt. And
then so you wouldn't be lumping the two together.
You'd actually, if you had a modern debt, you
believe what we call government debt would rise as
a result of it, that private debt would fall.
And even if I don't include changes in behavior,
when I model this, I get an increase in
economic activity because you're basically transferring money from bankers
who spend very slowly to workers who spend very
quickly. If we go back to the fifties and
sixties, and you take a look at the rate
of turnover of money in the American economy, money
turned over about 1.8 times per year. Uh It's
now running below one. Uh AND one reason for
the money people spent more freely back in the
fifties is people weren't worried about paying off their
level of private debt because it was quite low.
Mortgage debt was low uh there was almost, there
was no credit card debt, there was lays and
stuff like that. So we had a much level
of household debt and therefore households spend fairly not
thinking about if I don't hang on to some
of this money, I won't be able to service
next year, next month's mortgage. Once you get the
level of debt we have now people are always
worrying about, can I pay my debt off? And
the way individuals respond to that is by spending
more slowly. Now, if you spend more slowly, you
accumulate more money in your bank account, but the
person you would have spent on, doesn't we don't
create any extra money out of that. There is
no additional saving at the collective level out of
individual decisions to save what you have instead is
accumulation by some and d accumulation by others and
a slower rate of growth, turn of money and
the income falls. So if you go back to
the period where people are no longer scared of
the level of private debt, they're carrying the turnover
money might come close to doubling frankly and that
could effectively double economic activity over time. So there's
a real benefit to getting rid of the level
of private debt.
Mhm I I mean, in your mind, does this
have anything to do or is it at all
a moral question? I mean, because many times when
people think about specifically private debt, they say something
along the lines of, oh, if people have borrowed
money then they should pay it back, they should
pay their debts so many times. This is the
way we frame things. But from, uh, uh, I
mean, I'm not sure if a moral consideration should
also be made here, but just from an economics
perspective, does that make sense at all?
We don't believe that drug pushers should be, uh,
uh, allowed to enforce their debts because we know
they're selling in the moral products. Um And the
same thing applies with private debt. If banks were
responsible in how they lent, then there may be
more of a case to say, well, then the
borrower should be responsible in paying the debt back.
But if banks are willing to lend like they
did in the subprime catastrophe back in the 2008
where they were lending to people they knew couldn't
repay the debt. And they, you know, they got
all these terms like ninjas, no income, no job,
no assets, ok. And they're willing to lend to
somebody in that situation. The only reason being they
knew that the individual banker would get a, a
large bonus out of the amount of debt they
created. So the more you created, the better off
and then you fobbed it on to somebody else
through uh or they collateralized obligations and other statistical
devices that appeared to eliminate the risk, but of
course, could not do it could not eliminate it
and, and sold stuff which was, um, you know,
fraudulent. Frankly. Now, frankly, most of those people should
have gone, not, should have, should have gone to
jail. Only one banker went to jail over 2008.
That was Bernie Madoff. And you couldn't not put
Bernie Madoff in jail. He'd run a Ponzi scheme
for 40 years or thereabouts. So, whereas if we
look back in the 19 thirties and what's called
the Pakora Commission, pardon me? Which was an inquiry
into what caused the Great Depression. Hundreds of bankers
went to jail for morally reprehensible behavior which caused
the crisis. So let's let's do this evenly. Uh
I'd be quite happy to say people should repay
their debts if banks lent responsibly since they don't.
There's no moral case whatsoever for saying individuals should
have, must repay their debt.
So let me ask you now then about inflation
because that's something that people, particularly over the past.
I don't know, a couple of years have been
uh worried a lot about what explains inflation actually.
What's behind inflation?
I have often, I like to take a little
wine out of the National Rifle Association in America.
And they also who might have seen this one
quite regularly. Guns don't kill people, people kill people.
Well, my twist is that most people, conventional economy
will argue money supply causes inflation. And my argument
is money doesn't cause inflation. People cause inflation and
that's rather more valid than the um uh the
nr a way of using the same thing. So
there are 32 main groups of people who can
cause inflation, workers who demand wage rises in excess
of the rate of inflation and firms who can
put up their markups faster than the rate of
inflation. And the other factor is the real factor,
which is how many units of output are you
getting per worker? So you put those three factors
together and this is done, I've done it informally
in well, not informally done it formally in that
book but fairly aggregate data. Isabella Weber has done
excellent work on the role of markups and causing
inflation. And so has a statistician called Blair Fix
and they do much more disaggregated work. But the
basic message coming from the work, all three of
us do is that what actually caused the inflation
for the last 40 or so years was predominantly
the rate of change of markups exceeding the rate
of inflation. So the people who are putting up
prices weren't the workers with the wage demands. It
was the capitalists by putting a larger markup on
their cost of production to determine price. And like
for, for about if you look back over say
100 quarters of data, then for about 80 of
those quarters, markups rose rated higher than the rate
of inflation for about 15 of them or 20
maybe w wages rode higher than the rate of
inflation. And then the underlying thing is what's happening
in output per worker that generally speaking rose, which
actually reduces the rate of inflation until COVID hit.
Then we had all those supply shocks. So the
basic argument that comes out of that and Isabella
Webb has made this very well too is that
the the predominant cause is markups rising too rapidly.
Now, a major cause behind that is the uh
destruction of the union movement. Cos unions used to
bargain for wage rises and those wage rises would
mean that the, the markups were constrained by the
potential increase in wages as well. So, abolishing trade
unions contributed to the power that firms have to
put up prices, contributed to the potential for inflation
we saw in the post COVID period and then
the supply chains which are being built up, which
are incredibly fragile. We uh if you know, if
you know the, the, the m most people don't
have any real idea of how things are made
these days, the vast majority of the population longer,
certainly the West works and actually in factories, making,
making goods and services. Um BUT, but what we
had was a supply chain which where to make
a particular product, you might go through 30 or
40 different countries with a couple of 1000 components.
That's an incredibly fragile system. It's very efficient but
equally very fragile because it is very efficient. So
when COVID hit and break disrupted that supply chain.
We got increases in cost out of that. Uh
But Isabella Weber has argued that we should constrain
the extent to which firms can put up markups.
Since we've destroyed the trade union movement as a
balance against the power of corporations, we should have
the government uh having the power to limit how
fast markups can be increased and or to reduce
markups in critical industries for workers consumption. And if
you did one of the most interesting elements of
that is to take a look at inflation in
America. In the 1st and 2nd World War. In
the first World War, there was no controls and
it's actually quite a high rate of inflation in
America across the war years. They learned from their
lesson and when the Second World War began, they
created a prices commission and a non orthodox economist,
John Kenneth Galbraith was put in charge and the
inflation during the Second World War was constrained by
firms agreeing not to decrease the markups despite the
high level of monetary demand at the time. And
there was almost no inflation during world war two.
So it's feasible to control it. You you don't
let the people who have got the power use
that power by having a countervailing force, which is
what trade unions use to apply or the government
stepping in in the same role and limiting how
fast markups can increase.
And is inflation always a problem? Uh WHEN, when
is it a problem?
It's a, it's a problem when it gets to
be, you know, double digit levels. Um, BUT if
you look at, um, most of the period of
the, of the capitalist economies, there've only been a
handful of cases of hyperinflation and they were universally
ones where productive facilities were destroyed before the government
tried to compensate by increasing the rate of money
creation by the government. And then that led to
a, a spiral. So that as in, you know,
the classic being uh Germany uh when the via
my Republic period after the first World War, well
before the second, well before the rise of Hitler,
um they were hit impossible reparation terms, particularly by
the French and the Treaty of Versailles, they lost
the Rua Valley, they lost so many productive resources.
So hyperinflation occurred there trying to maintain people's capacity
to buy with a destroyed production system that gave
us the Weimar Zimbabwe uh dis disenfranchising the white,
the white farm owners that led to a collapse
in supply. Uh Argentina's a, a mess of its
own making with enormous amounts of income going to
the super rich and, and uh it a horrible
situation in terms of land ownership. Um So those
are the cases. But if you look at the,
the major economy that didn't suffer huge uh crashes
in their productive capability, the highest rate of inflation
we've seen is about 20%. And the dividing line
I I with hyperinflation and normal inflation is actually
about a 40% and between 30 40% there's almost
no cases. Then there's a handful of those above
40%. Most are below 30%. Uh RATES of inflation.
A small amount of inflation is not a bad
thing. In fact, it's potentially a good thing because
that bur of, of, of inflation inspires you to
spend somewhat rather than hanging out of money and
seeing it fall in value, you're more likely to
spend it. So again, if we take a look
at the, at the, at the rate of turnover
of money during the stable inflation days of the
fifties and, and, and early to mid sixties, that
was 1.8 when the high inflation hit in the
seventies, sixties, late, the early mid seventies to mid
eighties. Uh THE Volcker period uh when inflation hit
17% in America, the rate of turn of money
rose to 3.5 times rather than 1.8. That's compensating
for the, you know, higher, higher pri uh rate
of inflation. Um BUT so a moderate amount of
inflation encourage you to spend. And that is AAA
positive benefit that money which is effectively falling in
value gives. And in fact, there's a, a non
orthodox Argentinian monetary theorist called Sil Silvio Gazelle who
argues that all money should depreciate the idea being
if money's a hot potato, it gets transferred one
person to another causing more economic activity. So there's,
there's an argument that a small amount of inflation
does that but too much inflation, you then start
getting uh what Phillips who first identified is called
a wage price spiral. And, and that is a
counterproductive syndrome. You want to control it um will
stop it. But generally speaking, inflation of the in
the range of of 0 to 7 10% even
is bearable. It's when it gets into double digits,
we start seeing problems.
So in a sort of related topic, how are
prices determined? What kinds of factors play a role
in that?
I tend to work at the aggregate level. So
I'm not going to go down into, into detailed
price setting, but I'll start from that point of
view. In fact, because if you imagine bringing on
a new product, like for example, an electric bicycle
or electric car, uh you, you can work out
what the components are needed to make that. So
you get all the, all the what we, what
we call variable cost, the metal, you've got to
buy the electricity, the labor and so on. And
that gives you a price level. And then the
question is, well, how many units can we expect
to sell? And what size factory do we need
to make those units? Then you get your fixed
costs which come out of that. And then your
calculation is well, given the size of the market,
the segment we're selling into, can we expect to
break even uh or make a profit uh given
those fixed costs? And those considerations come through to
you determine what markup you can set. And you'll
also look at, well, what's the, what's the current
markup? What are our competitors currently marking up the
cost of electric car, etcetera, etcetera. So all those
calculations are at the micro level. Uh WHEN you
get at the macro level, you come down to
that question of the markup. The, the markup is
what corporations set to uh get a profit out
of selling its unit. Uh The the wage costs
turn up. That's your major cost as a firm
uh coming from not other firms, but where else
do you buy from? Predominantly you buy from households,
you buy labor. Uh And then as I said,
the you, yeah, output per unit. So those are
the three ones. The Kalesi identified is Gilles price
equation and the basic equation is the uh uh
price level is 1/1 minus the markup multiplied by
the wage divided by output per worker. And then
when you put it in dynamic terms, you get
the rate of change of markups, the rate of
change of money wages and the rate of change
of output per worker. Those are the three major
determinants of inflation at the macro level. And given
that markups have been rising faster than the rate
of inflation over time. I've seen some neoclassical estimates
which imply markups have gone from an average of
about 20% to 65% over the period from 1970
to now. I intend redoing that work in a
non neoclassical way at some point. But it implies
by far the major effect that causes the inflation
is the is, is corporations fundamentally the capitalist class
getting a larger share of apple by putting up
mockups, that's been the main cause of inflation. So
we want to reduce that. Uh If you want
to reduce the rate of inflation, your primary target
is to reduce the markups that firms put on
their commodities.
OK. So I I would like to ask you
now a little bit about money and the role
of banks in the economic system because it, it
might be the case that people commonly have some
misconceptions about these kinds of topics. And I would
really love who on this podcast go through them.
So uh how is money created actually? I mean,
is it just a government issuing new money through
the central bank or is it more complicated than
that?
It's more complicated but also more simple. So there
are two ways to create money in a capitalist
economy. Banks lend out more money than they go
back into repayments. That's how private banks create money.
And they do that by marking up both sides
of their ledger. So they, they put more money
in a private person's deposit account. They have a
million euro to buy a house in Warsaw. Yeah.
Uh, AND they then record well, your, is precisely
a million dollars more at the same time. So
they mark up their assets and their liabilities. The
government creates money by spending more than it gets
back on taxation. And when you work out the,
uh, overall dynamics and I've built the only software
package in the world that can show that I
call it Minsky and are happy to get people
to download a copy of Minsky and try it
out for themselves. When you look at how governments
create money, they create money by going to negative
financial equity. So the treasury spends more than it
gets back in, in taxation. And that spending a
adds to its negative equity in financial terms. So
it has more financial liability than it has financial
assets. But in because in an overall system, the
sum of all financial assets and liabilities are zero,
the government getting more negative financial equity means that
the, the non government sector gets identical, positive financial
equity and that therefore the, that the government money
creation doesn't create any debt for the government because
if you had a a sensible system, the treasury
could issue bonds and the central bank could buy
them straight away. Uh So that's in, in that
case, the, the, the gov the government debt would
be owned by the government. OK? Which is a,
which is a point that we can't do that.
You can't, household debt can't be owned by the
household. Ok. If you're a million dollars in debt,
you can ask your wife to pay it, pay
it out for you. Ok, you're a million dollars
in debt to the bank. And, uh, you've got
to satisfy the bank's need for the money and,
you know, your wife can't say, well, I'll take
it over for you. Just not possible. So, uh,
government, government's uh money creation doesn't have to involve
uh selling bonds to any private sector. It's only
laws that require that which were drafted by politicians
and economists who don't understand the monetary system. But
punchline the the pri the private sector creates money
by expanding in its assets and liabilities identically which
the banking sector can do. The government creates money
by creating net financial assets for the non-government sector.
And that necessarily means net financial liabilities for it.
So just to see if I get this right?
And in more simple terms, so when it comes
to the banks, whenever a bank lends money to
a private person, I is it creating new money
or not?
Yes, it is. And the mainstream ignore this. They
they want to argue that the banks are what
they call intermediaries. The banks supposedly just take money
from savers and lend it out to borrowers again.
That is nonsense. And uh a non mainstream group
of economists have been saying that right, since Joseph
Sean payer and even earlier than that back in
the 18 hundreds. Um BUT the mainstream has been
ignoring that all the way through and they continued
ignoring it until the bank. Pardon me? The Bank
of England came out in 2014 said the heretics
are right, banks create money when they lend the
Bundesbank said the same thing. And what did the
mainstream do? Ignored it? Yeah, they just don't wanna
when you, when you challenge the paradigm and this
is the paradigm, challenging component, they don't even want
to engage with you. So you'd imagine that when
they gave a Nobel Prize in Economics to Ben
Bernanke in 2022 which is not a Nobel Prize.
It's something that was made up by the Swedish
Central Bank and called after Nobel. Uh WHEN they
did that, you'd think they'd acknowledged the Bank of
England and the Bundesbank. But in their so called
scientific document for giving the money to Bernanke and
his two fellow neoclassical, they did not even cite
the Bank of England or the Bundesbank, they just
ignore the whole damn thing. So it, it, it's
incredibly wrong to do that because banks create money
when they lend. And then when you take a
look at the consequences of that, you find that
every last major crisis in capitalism has been caused
by a private debt bubble. But the mainstream says
private debt doesn't matter. They've had no explanation and
no warning of any of the crises, capitalism has
experienced in its last 1.5 centuries because they ignore
the primary course.
But then for the purposes of understanding money creation
and for the economy, more general, more generally, there's
a difference between credit and fiat money. Right.
Yeah, credit money is money that banks create when
you borrow from them. And if you borrow from
a bank, fundamentally, your net financial assets remain constant
because the, the increase in your uh, money in
your bank account is perfectly offset by the increase
in debt that you owe to the bank. So
that private individuals get no increase in their um
personal equity out of borrowing. Why do they do
it? It's because they think they can buy a
non-financial asset, things like a factory or a house
uh and see an increase in, in monetary value
and make a profit out of that. That's why
we do it with government money creation. The government
spends more than gets back in taxation that creates
money we get in a bank account with no
additional debt for us attached to it. So for
the recipient of net government spending, it's, it's money
without uh without debt and that tends to be
spent more freely. So, unfortunately, because economists wrongly think
that government debt matters and private debt does not,
they've encouraged too much private money and not enough
government money creation.
Mhm. And would it be possible for government to
take on the role of banks and uh government
being the only institution creating money or is that
not possible
at all? It's, it's possible. Um, I mean, I've,
I have problems about whether that would work or
not. Um, BECAUSE you, uh governments tend to centralize,
just like banks tend to centralize now and the
more you centralize, the less, you know. Um So
what you actually want a more distributed system for
banking? So, Richard Werner, who's the, you know, a
German expert on, on, on banking, uh favors the
German system where you have lots of small regional
banks and often they'll be community banks of various
sorts rather than for profits. And they tend to
be low, close to the community and they can
work out who's a good uh credit risk and
who's not, what's a decent product and what's not,
you want that distributed system. So it'd be possible
to have a government system in there. But I'd
want to have some way that you had private
judgment coming in to decide who got the money
and who didn't. And that's organizations like positive money
UK, which I'm on the advisory board to, they
often recommend that sort of system and that the
government should create the, the bulk of the money.
But then you try to get the private private
banks to decide who gets it and who doesn't
in terms of loans. Uh Again, as much as
I think that's more appealing than what we do
at the moment, you also have to work out
well. Could banks be profitable if they don't have
the capacity to create money? That would mean you
have to limit uh banks to having a set
fund out of which they lend the whole idea
that banks create money out of nothing, doesn't mean
they waive a wand and create money. What it
means is there's no other account out of which
they're taking funds to lend to you. Now, if
you set up a system where that did happen
and it's quite feasible to do that. Um THEN
it might be that the arbitrage by charging a
higher interest rate on their lending out than they
get. Uh THEY have to pay for the funds
in this lender loan fund system. If you do
that, that might not be profitable and you don't
want a capitalist economy without a profitable banking sector
because it's, it's fundamentally a monetary system. So I'm,
I'm a bit ambivalent. I would rather have private
uh money creation as well as government money creation,
but I'd have strict limits on what that money
can be created for, to rule out speculation and
focus upon long-term consumption for the household sector and
working capital and investment capital for the corporate sector.
OK. So uh let me ask you this question.
I might be missing something here and if I
say something wrong, please correct me. But uh when
it comes to credit money, then what actually then
gives value to it. I mean, is it, uh,
the way the person it gets, uh, lent to,
is going to spend it on the economy or,
or is it that though? I, I mean, that
that person has to work to then earn that
money for wages to pay it back? I mean,
what exactly is, is then giving value to that
money?
Well, you have to have the money being spared.
Um, PEOPLE often make a confusion. They think, well,
if you borrow $100 from the bank and they're
charging 5% they give you 100 you've gotta pack
100 and five. It's unsustainable, it must collapse. That's
only unsustainable. If you don't spend the money you've
borrowed. Now, what happens tends to happen if you
borrow 100 uh, you spend $200 per year. So
you spend the money at a rate of, you
know, two times per year, you pay 100 and
60 towards your suppliers and that includes uh wages,
you pay, let's say 10% interest to the bank.
So you pay them $10 you get 30 in
profit. So if the money is enabling turnover and
economic activity, you can finance that level of debt.
And the fact you're paying interest on it isn't,
isn't, doesn't mean that the interest gets added to
the principle that only happens if you don't spend
the money. Now, nobody borrows for the sheer pleasure
of being in debt. Uh, PEOPLE can borrow for
ventures that don't work and therefore they can't pay
the debt back and they go bankrupt in the
firm. The bank lends loses the money that they
created for them. That's quite feasible. They might also
gain the assets, the route, the non financial assets
that were built using that money and they can
then sell them on the secondary market. So it's,
it's a more complicated system than just as I
as I've implied it. Um BUT fundamentally, money works
if money is spent and a private, so you
could have a functional private money system with no
government money creation at all. But what that tends
to do is in that we've seen this historically,
whenever the level of government money creation plunges, the
the private sector tends to do more, more borrowing
and gambling on financial assets. And the reason is
that when you look at the banking sector, banks
must have positive equity, a bank's assets must exceed
its liabilities, short-term assets, short-term liabilities is always a
maturity matching issue when you talk about debt. But
a bank which has more short-term liabilities than short-term
assets is bankrupt. So therefore, the banking sector in
the aggregate has more financial assets than liabilities. That
means the non-bank financial sector, if there is not
a government must have more financial liabilities and assets.
Now, if you think about, if you had a
system like that and corporations and households are both
in negative equity, then they're gonna be tempted to
borrow money from a bank which doesn't change the
level of an equity equity by a non-financial asset
like a house or a share, see it rise
in value and then notionally regard their equity as
now being positive. In other words, a government trying
to eliminate its level of debt ends up encouraging
the private sector to get into financial bubbles. And
that's what we saw during the 19th century. Every
10 to 15 years, there was a financial bubble
and crash and and that is not a healthy
system. So you you it is preferable to have
government money creation to the stage at which both
banks and the non-bank private sector can be in
positive financial equity while the government carries the negative
financial equity that it's got every capacity in the
world to handle.
Mhm. So let me ask you now, uh this
is something that I actually want to ask you
about because I read about it in your work.
It's a very interesting thing and another sort of
misconception that people tend to have. What is GDP
exactly when people refer to GDP, what goals attached
to it in terms of uh I mean, what
generates GDP,
let's say it's fundamentally adding up all the flows
of goods and services in an economy over a
year and therefore it's anything newly produced and newly
sold, it's not um houses which existing houses, the
sale of an existing house does not add to
GDP, but then it's the flow of new goods
and services coming out of a productive eco productive
facilities of an economy over a year. And the,
the only way you can add them up is
by the money value. Now, that therefore means you
have um you know, you're adding, you know, um
microphones to coffee cups. OK? Um So it's a,
it's a very uh lumpy aggregation of very different
things. The intriguing thing that I have found when
I look at the global data is that when
you look at global GDP and global energy consumption,
they're almost the same thing fundamentally what GDP is
energy, which we find in the universe for free.
Fundamentally, we didn't, we didn't create the oil and
gas and, and uranium and sunlight that we find
in the universe. It's just there, we take advantage
of it. Uh And we then transform it into
a more useful formal forms. So, you know, wind
outside from the, from the environment becomes heating inside
your house, that sort of thing. So you take
energy in one form and convert it to another
one. You must have losses. That's where the laws
of thermodynamics come in. So you lose energy in
that process or you have energy which is no
longer available for use. Uh But useful, converting free
energy free inverts as we didn't create it to
useful work is what creates GDP and a fit
between two is almost like a glove. So uh
fundamentally, even though GDP is a, you know, horrible
aggregate of things which are very different and microphones
and coffee cups uh at the level of aggregate
level of production, what you find is that fundamentally
GDP measures the amount of energy we've turned into
useful work for ourselves.
Mhm. But is it the case that a at
least the way that uh governments and other institutions
tend to work out for GDP would also include,
I don't know, perhaps money that is not attached
to um, the things that are actually valuable or
productive. Uh I don't know.
Oh, there's a lot of, you know, we, we
produce garbage two ways about it and, and we,
and we over price, you know, like a Louis
Vuitton handbag. II, I don't think it's costs, you
know, a, a handbag costs more than my computer.
And I've seen enough of those because my wife
likes buying handbags. Um, YOU know, it's, it's pretty
insane. So we put a huge value, a huge
price on things with no value. And that, that
is a fundamental problem in the, and the more
elite consumption we have, the more that tends to
happen. I saw a video clip through Twitter a
couple of days ago of some corporation in America
making a, uh a submarine for high end consumers
to go and take a look at depths of
up to 200 m. Um It's a great piece
of technology, but it's, it's designed for an uber
wealthy can afford a fortune to go on a
Submersible vehicle, which is also apparently a high, you
know, it's a high speed boat as well as
a submarine. I think even a plane. This crazy
combination. That is a sign of how unequal the
distribution of income is that the wealthy have that
much income to wake on based on what is
for them frivolous. The fact that a wealthy person
sees his octopus at 200 m is not a
particularly great social contribution. So we do have an
enormous amount of wasteful stuff in there. But again,
what that reflects is the distribution of income. And
GDP completely ignores the distribution of income. So to
focus upon GDP alone and say that rising is
a good thing is ignoring how distorted the distribution
of income has become. And there's no way that
that the change between the 19 sixties and now
have been a massive shift of income towards the
wealthy. So the fact that GDP has risen is
irrelevant for most people because if you broke it
into GDP, receive goods and services received by the
poor parts of society or poor to like even
the even the bottom 90% that has risen trivially
compared to the amount that's going to the top
10. So I would like to see a distributional
measure added to GDP as well as the actual
raw number and that is not done by any
country in the world, unfortunately.
But is there any metric that, I mean, just
institutions or governments or people tend to use that
would give us that income distribution information within
the data. The data is hard to get because
people can see how much they earn and you
and I don't, but, you know, Jeff Bezos does.
So it, it's hard to get the income from
the top level. But yeah, the, we have a
rough idea of that and you can certainly find
data on the distribution of income. Uh OR I
mean, the best data has actually been put together
by one of my good friends, uh Jamie Galbraith,
the son of John Kenneth Galbraith and his is
what's called a teal, a teal distribution to work
out distribution of income, not just at the national
level, even down to local government areas. So it
can be done and it should be part of
what national stats do. And we should really have
the focus upon enabling the poorest people to have
the greatest increase in income. This is one reason
China's been so successful because that's what it's done.
Uh There were some very wealthy individuals in China,
but they've also put some billionaires behind bars at
various times. We never do that in the West
uh for, for what they see as bad behavior.
Uh AND the, and the standard of living of
ordinary China has risen stupendously over the last 40
years. Whereas across the same time period, the working
class in America and Europe has, if they're lucky,
tried water, they've got more sophisticated devices now than
they had back then. They're massively more in debt.
Uh They have far fewer prospects of educational advancement
and so on. So the, the, the supposed performance
of the Western GDP terms is illusory, whereas performance
of GDP in China has been quite successful.
So I I mean, perhaps the level of importance
that people tend to attach to GB DP alone
is overblown, right? I mean, because it's perfectly possible
for GDP in a particular country, for example, to
go up over time but still life for even
the majority of people living there, uh standards of
living actually going down at least a little bit.
Yeah, like America, that's one reason why I think
something like that for Donald Trump, they've had 50
years of that happening ever since America started outsourcing
production to third world countries. And like my favorite
example, there is what I learned personally when I
went on a trip to China in 81 with
a group of journalists doing a uh a seminar
with Chinese journalists and then visiting various parts of
China on a study tour. Um WE uh went
to the Shenzhen free trade zone which is just
outside Hong Kong as it was being built before
it even took the first customer. And the II
I knew China was gonna succeed when I saw
that particular facility because the managers explained that any
American corporation was hap was uh happy to set
up in that uh trade zone. So long as
a they had a Chinese partner and b within
five years, whatever amount of capital the Chinese partner
put into the business within five years, the Chinese
partner owned 50% of the business. Now, I was
just stunned when I heard those numbers and thought,
what American corporation is going to agree to this?
The answer is any work American corporation that reckons
is gonna do better by paying Chinese workers low
wages rather than paying American workers high ones. And
that's what happened over time. The Fox one and
all those corporations came out of that process. So
China, the Chinese uh communists knew that they were
uh importing, not just American technology, they were creating
a capitalist class at the same time, partly out
of their caves and partly out of some of
the firm firm managers. And they were deliberately setting
up a capitalist economy inside China while also grabbing
American technology. And the fact that American corporations would
agree to that just shows how different the wages
must be. I don't remember what wages were for
American workers back in 1980 let's say, were a
$2 an hour. Well, they must have been paying
Chinese workers, you know, 20 cents an hour and
then by reducing their wage costs. So dramatically. Uh
HALF the having half the firm, which is what
was required by the deal was more profitable than
owning 100%. If the workers you were paying were
Chinese rather than American. So that was what decimated
America's productive capability. It destroyed Detroit, it turned, they
created what we call the rust belt where factories
were shut down because there's no point shipping the
machinery. You, you put new technology over in China
and, and ship the goods back and that was
really what screwed the working class in America. It
turned them against the Democrats. Democrats let that sort
of thing happen. So it, it's a very destructive
thing to do. Um BUT that's typical, I mean,
American capitalists, uh they have no real regard for
their own workers and China which did have regard
for its own workers, did that to get the
technology. And now what you find is the skill
level in China far exceeds that in America. So
the interesting innovations and new patents are coming out
of China, not America.
So in a way related to what you just
explained there, could you tell us about this concept
that you use in your work? Financial capitalism? What
does that mean?
It finally means that banks and non bank, financial
institutions, superannuation firms, insurance, uh or real estate, etcetera,
etcetera. There's actually a division of the American statistics
called fire finance insurance and real estate. And when
Copeland put the tables together the national income and
production accounts way back in the forties and fifties.
Um He just basically said, well, we can measure
the output of the manufacturing sector. You know, they
sell goods with a price attached to them so
we can work out what the output is of
those sectors. What about the finance sector? What are
they selling? Well, they're selling a service, often extra
levels of debt. You can't record the increase in
debt as the output. So the way the the
output of the fire sector was measured was by
adding up the wages and profits as if those
wages and profits were equivalent to wages and profits
in the finan in in the in the uh
industrial sector. Now that means paying, paying a if
you increase the salary of the the boss of
Morgan Stanley by 10 million GDP goes up by
10 million. Yeah. Mhm. Very different. Or if you
have general motors producing more cars, more cars are
produced $10 million extra output turns up as goods
and service c circulating in the economy, the finance
sector should be limited to the role of creating
the money that the uh industrial sector needs to
finance investment and pro and production. And that used
to be the case uh after the second world
war because the the Great Depression and the second
world war was such a huge shock to the
system that the emphasis became on making sure the
workers, the ones who had often fought the wars
came back and had a decent lifestyle, a decent
standard of living. And the finance sector was the
servant of the industrial sector, not the boss as
the level of private debt rose over time. And
we focus more upon financial speculation rather than industrial
production. You get the finance sector being the boss
and the industrial sector being the servant. And that
is a recipe disaster. Cos as Mars himself said,
dec a century ago, a century beforehand, uh this,
this crowd knows nothing about production and should have
nothing to do with it. So you get a
corrupted system coming out when the financial sector dominates.
And e even though I think the financial sector
is massively important in a, in a capitalist economy,
if you don't understand it, you don't understand capitalism.
At the same time, I want to limit the
power of the financial sector and make of the
industrial sector front bad billing because the one thing
which you can really say defends capitalism against all
other social systems is the level of innovation it
causes in production and that innovation comes out of
engineers. Uh AND, and the competitive pressures in a
real market and those competitive pressures are what give
us the change in technology we've seen over time.
And that is, is, you know, the the positive
benefit of capitalism when you give it to the
financial sector, they find different ways to entice us
to take our debt. They're not doing anything. They're
actually more after a certain stage, they're more vampires
than they are blood donors.
So, I, I might be putting these into simplistic
terms and perhaps a little bit, I don't know,
misleading but, uh, it seems to me then that
financial capitalism is pretty much about trying to generate
money from money instead of having money attached to
actually the creation of, uh, valuable things, goods, services
and other things like that.
Yeah, that's fairly realistic. I think if you actually
if you go and see the Wolf of Wall
Street to get an idea of what the finance
sector actually does and that's much more realistic than
any economic text book,
right? So uh doctor can do, do you think
that we still have time perhaps to get a
little bit into climate change? There is another
one of your interest?
Ok. So um I mean, you've been of course,
also focused particularly recently on the issue of climate
change. So why is climate change not only environmentally
but also economically such a big issue?
Because we have a, we, we are actually a
nomadic species that is now living a sedentary lifestyle
and that sedentary lifestyle only became possible the temperatures
of the called the holocene period because when you
look at the temperature history of the planet, uh
we only evolved about 300,000 years ago with the
planet's been around for, you know, at, at least
uh 4 billion years. So we, we're tiny fracture
of the history of the planet in that particular
history. There's been what are called Milankovic cycles that
dominate the global temperature and they are cycles in
the temperature caused by oscillations in the earth's cycles
around the, around the sun and they give you
peak uh peaks and troughs lasting about 100,000 years.
We built our industrial civilization on one of the
peaks. So temperatures six degrees warmer now than it
was during the ice age. Ice ages tend to
last for about 60,000 years in interglacial, which is
what we're in right now. Last for about 40,000
years where there's a, a sort of 15,000 years
of rising 15,000 years of falling. And at the
turnover point, you've got about 10,000 years of stability.
So we built our entire system on that 10,000
year peak. Now, if we hadn't, so pumping carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere, we'd be falling back down
into another ice age. And that you can see
that in the data, the peak period for global
temperatures was about 4000 years ago. It's been getting
cooler ever since 4000 years ago through the natural
cycle. About 250 years ago, we started pumping carbon
dioxide out and that has meant a, a rise
in temperature which is an increase in temperature 30
times faster than the fall in temperature caused by
the, the maximum rate of decline in the Wako
cycle going back down into another ice age that
uh the infrastructure we built everything we were built
to uh enable us to have industrial uh production
and industrial agriculture and so on. Um Relied upon
a temperature range of about plus or minus one
degree around that holocene average. We are now 1.5
degrees above that average and increasing a factor of
30 our infrastructure will not cope and we're now
starting to see the beginning signs of that with
some of the catastrophic storms, we're seeing anybody wants
to argue that, you know, Swiss Alps have always
been washed away during a storm. You know, Swiss
villages have always disappeared. But that's garbage that the
events we're seeing now, I mean, when I was
with a colleague from Milan recently in the Caribbean
and he, he told me about seeing as, as
I've seen on Twitter, rivers of ice flowing through
Milan in summer and those rivers of ice occurs
by catastrophic hailstorms which create so much hail that
literally you get a river of ice flowing through
the streets of Milan during late spring, you know,
bizarre stuff like that. Um So what we're getting
is the volatility that comes out of increasing the
temperature by 1.5 degrees, which is what we've done
over the pre industrial level and that increases the
moisture content by the atmosphere by 10%. It also
increases the volatility of the atmosphere. So we're gonna
see storms which destroy the infrastructure we built for
that stable one plus or minus one degree level.
And that's why it's important. Uh We only have
GDP if we have factories. Now, mainstream economists who
are a bunch of losers when it comes to
how they think about the real world. So let's
assume that storms don't affect factories. Let's assume that
damage from, you know, high temperatures or high rainfall
only damages goods and services. It doesn't damage factories.
That's a nice assumption. That'll simplify our model. It
makes your model completely bullshit, completely wrong, but that's
what they've done. So they make assumptions. They basically
assume climate change doesn't affect the economy and then
talk about how to manage the economy because of
climate change. It's just ludicrous. So I'm, I'm incredibly
angry about what they've done because they're going to
destroy capitalism. But the only way we maintain a
capitalist economy is to maintain that temperature level we
hit during the Holocene period. We should have used
what we now know about how the climate is
affected by carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gasses to
stabilize the temperature at that six degrees above the
previous ice age level. Even through the cycles, we
know the planet's gonna go through that would have
been rational. Instead, we've blasted into unknown territory 30
times faster than the natural cycles loan would take
us. And that is gonna destroy our infrastructure just
as effectively if we'd let the natural cycle continue
and we'd end up with the, with the sheets
of ice over, over New York, which is the
other extreme. So we should have gone for stability
instead because of neoclassical economists who like to think
capitalism cope with anything. Therefore, global war can't be
a problem. We're about to see what I expect
to be the destruction of capitalism
and what do you make of some of those
arguments that sometimes we hear particularly from econom uh
economists and also people associated of course with the
financial system when they say or claim that, oh,
you know, of course, we're having more natural disasters
here and there across the globe. But people are
not considering the fact that because the temperatures have
been rising over the past few years that there
are a few places in the world where actually
life now is a bit better for some people.
They have more livable conditions. And also when they
say that, oh, and at the end of the
day, we will eventually tackle this issue through technological
development or I I mean, those kinds of arguments
that we sometimes
naive, simply naive. Uh IF for example, pe people
think, OK, now that we've got, you know, higher
temperatures we can now farm Siberia, well put the
top soil then first please. OK, what, what exists
in Siberia used to be permafrost? Uh THE idea
that you can farm permafrost just shows people have
never seen what the soil is like and don't
know what it's like to have methane seeping out
of the soil as the, as the, as the
permafrost melts and, and microorganisms start turning the carbon
stored there into either methane or carbon dioxide. Uh
It's simply, they just simply don't realize the scale
on which the planet itself operates and the forces
were triggering by uh by letting the temperature rise
will then cause tipping points with other systems where
they will take over the damage they're doing to
our system right now. So one of the classic
tipping points is losing uh ice because ice reflects
sunlight. And the, the reason we have global warming
is not because we're pumping lots of heat into
the atmosphere. That will be the case if we
could keep on going for 400 years. But at
the moment, it's only a trivial contribution to the
increase in temperature. Most of the increases by extra
carbon uh carbon dioxide and other uh greenhouse gasses
including the extra moisture cos that's also a CA
A AAA greenhouse gas that increases the amount of
temperature you retain. So the sun come, that's then
it comes in from the sun and it gets
uh prevented from going back out again as infrared
by bouncing off these molecules that capture the infrared.
And therefore it raises the overall temperature of the,
the biosphere. Uh THE, the forces are enormous. So
if we lose the amount of ice, which is
happening quite radically. Right now, there's less reflection that
also increases temperature, that's independent of the carbon dioxide
cycle. Uh If we then uh loosen up the
permafrost and even worse ocean methane hydrates, the amount
of carbon there is in, in the, in the,
in the uh permafrost is apparently two or three
times what we've already put into the atmosphere. If
that starts letting itself go in a, you know,
it's like a chain reaction, that chain reaction is
far more powerful than we can do to control
it. So we're letting forces, we're, we're, we're, we're
letting loose forces that we have no conception of
the scale and no capacity to control. And that's
why it's simply irresponsible and dangerous and this sort
of stuff, anybody who talks in that way should
be thrown out of any discussion over what to
do. But unfortunately, because economists are taken seriously, people
believe they know what they're talking about and they
think that economists are taking what scientists have said
and put it into economic terms. Nothing could be
further from the truth. I have read every paper
that economists have written on the total cost of
carbon, of climate change and hundreds of other papers
by economists and I've read two or three times
as many papers by scientists and not one of
the papers by economists makes assumptions that any scientist
would accept about what climate change does to the
global system So economists have bullshitted their way because
they really didn't want to understand this issue. They
simply wanted a way to say it doesn't matter.
And they've made up their own numbers to say
that it doesn't matter. The numbers have got nothing
to do with the physical real world and we're
likely seeing the collapse of their predictions happening this
year and going forward, uh the damage that global
warming will do to our productive a apparatus is
far, far greater than economists have misled us into
believing. So the financial system which has taken their
advice seriously is likely to have a serious collapse
at a Minsky moment, once people realize just how
wrong these predictions are, uh and we're gonna destroy
our productive capability at the same time, it'll be
a struggle to hang on to what we call
civilization and that's what we should be thinking about.
We are destroying our capacity to have the civilization
we call capitalism.
Mhm. So, uh also I would like to have
your reaction to another kind of ar argument that
we hear very frequently from economists and other people
like that. This is probably even more common than
the other kinds of arguments I mentioned before. I
mean, when they say that um to tackle climate
change, it would imply slowing down economic growth in
a way that would have even worse consequences than
the consequences of climate change itself. And so, and
so it would be better to just, I mean,
basically for the most part, keep uh keep things
running and having uh higher levels of economic growth,
even if we contribute to raising temp global temperatures
even more. I mean, does that make any sense
at all?
None whatsoever. Can I use French and they're fucking
idiots? Ok. This is stupid stuff. They should never
have been allowed under the policy discussion. Uh And
I say they're fucking idiots because when you look
at how they've tried to calibrate this stuff, they'll
make assumptions like as Nordhaus did initially that a
roof will protect you from climate change. He didn't
put it quite that stupidly. He wrote um economic
activity. Most economic activity takes heaven carefully controlled environments
which will be negligently affected by climate change. Now,
his definition of carefully controlled environments uh and when
you first put that phrase out in a 1991
paper was all of manufacturing, all of wholesale and
retail services, all of the government sector, all as
finance and insurance and most of real estate and
some transportation as well. And he said that 87%
of the economy would be negligibly affected by climate
change. And he included mining, he literally had mining
as an industry which would be neckless, be affected
by climate change and a total of 87%. Now,
sometime later, somebody must have tapped him on the
shoulder and said, oh William, there were there was
open cut mining mate as well as underground mining.
So in a 1993 paper, he then revised it
and said underground mining would be unaffected and he
reduced the figure from 87 to 85%. Now that
shows he basically thinks to be exposed to climate
change. You have to be exposed to the weather,
which is why I say he's assuming a roof
will protect you from climate change. Tell that to
anybody in the Swiss villages that just got wiped
out a couple of days ago by avalanches caused
by excess rainfall. Tell that to anybody in Houston
who's, who's uh super uh uh skyscrapers had their
windows smashed by tornadoes that went through about four
or five weeks ago. Uh And, and, and until
it's the people in, in Taiwan, I had to
shut down semiconductor plants because the, the water got
too hot to be able to be used for
some of the cooling processes. So the whole idea
that a roof will protect you from climate change
shows how caught up they are on a blackboard
view of the world or a white board view
of the world where you put in your GDP
as a function of labor and capital and everything
happens inside the brackets of the function. But like
in the real world, even if it were true
that a roof is protected from climate change, you've
still gotta put goods on the services on a
road to go to another factory to get them
worked over if the road gets washed away by
a storm, which happened in Vancouver a couple of
years ago, you can't use the road anymore. Ok.
So there's no, there's no such thing as a
carefully controlled environment. There's a, there's an environment set
up for the existing environmental conditions inside a closed
facility, but they change those environmental facilities and the
air conditioning parameters of the factory won't work anymore.
The roads won't work, the machines will be destroyed
and flooded out, etcetera, etcetera. The naivety of these
assumptions is simply breathtaking. And when I look at
it, the only reason this shit got published is
because other academic, other economists ref refereed it and
they're equally stupid and clueless about what climate change
is and what climate change means. So we have
uh when people finally look at this as I
only did, unfortunately, just uh five years ago and
I finally read this nonsense, I realized none of
this stuff should have been published only because economics
itself is such a crippled discipline was garbage like
this ever allowed into print. And the trouble is
that people outside academia think refereeing means only quality
work gets published that applies in some sciences, in
genuine sciences. But in economics refereeing means this was
approved by other people who believe the market system
is the best of all possible systems and also
reject any challenge that says we're soliciting loose forces
which might wipe out our system. So it's garbage
should never have been published. And uh when people,
you know, I've, I've spent five years trying to
communicate this to the public just how bad the
work of economists is. Um I've got through to
some people, but policy makers are still accepting that
economists know what they're talking about, still letting them
make most of the decisions. And the result is
we are walking into a catastrophe, blindfolded by economic
theory.
So let me ask you just two more questions
then uh and on that last bit about the
catastrophe we w we're walking into, I mean, according
to perhaps the best estimates, predictions that we have.
And I'm not only asking you environmentally but mostly
economically speaking because this is an economics interview. What
are the worst possible consequences of climate change that
we might experience in the future?
Nest fes uh global starvation, what are called wet
belt temperatures, levels of heat and, and, and, and
humidity as well, which mean people, even he healthy
people uh in the shade die within six hours
more pandemics. We're likely to get a bird flu
pandemic coming away pretty shortly that might kill, you
know, half the population of the planet if it
gets widely distributed. Um COLLAPSE of civilisations, people normally
think it's gonna be poor countries that collapse. Economists
feed this garbage all the time out about that.
I think it might be the, it's more likely
to be the highly advanced industrial civilisations where people
are enormously separated from food production, they're more likely
to suffer. So I wouldn't want to be in
England when climate change really strikes because they already
import pretty close to half their food. And therefore,
if there's a global famine, the British won't be
able to weep um social breakdown, possibly even wars,
wars between different countries, potentially nuclear war. It's Armageddon.
We're playing with Armageddon and trying to maximize our
utility through Armageddon. And, and that is incredibly dangerous.
So, uh and this will, this won't happen gradually.
It will happen in fits and starts and then
catastrophic changes at different times. So nobody can say
what the actual uh you know, first devastating blow
will be my. If you, if you, if you
look at the climate change community, they're sort of
taking bets these days. Not quite, but there's a,
there's one guy on Twitter who has fake bets
regularly and you know, what's it gonna be? Global
famine, global pandemic uh hit wet bulb catastrophes. Uh
You know, super storms, what's gonna be the thing
that wakes people up? And uh iiii I pretty
much put my chips down on the, on the
global famine front because if we had like one
day of extreme temperatures over Iowa with low levels
of humidity that can actually burn the crop in
situ. So suddenly you've got enough feed for, you
know, food to feed a billion people. And then
one day later you've got enough to feed a
million people, uh, or you can have hail storms
that wipe out it or you can have, um,
uh, you know, hurricanes and tornadoes passing through and
destroying the crop all this. You know, we have
no idea what, how nature is gonna smash us
in the face. We just know that it's gonna
smash us in the face and to say we
can all put it off and do it later
shows they have no concept of the level of
forces that are involved in this. And they're trivializing
the issue we face and they should not be
allowed anywhere near policy.
So it's a very strong possibility that civilization as
we know it nowadays might completely collapse,
will completely collapse. I mean, I I you, you,
you'll get a range of opinion, Michael Mann is
still pushing the argument that we can all do
it by 2050 which is true sort of if
we have, if we actually treat the issue as
seriously as it deserves to be treated. But because
economists have created these completely misleading ideas about the
damage we face, people have been doing trivial actions
about it and the the rate of carbon increase
of carbon dioxide pretty much reached the perfect exponential
curve from 1750 forward. All the policy we've done
is on bugger all to change how fast rating
carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, something like about 15%
of the population even including some intelligent people like
Richard Verner, I mentioned earlier uh believe myths about
climate change, believe that carbon dioxide doesn't cause anything.
Um And, and that it's actually good for us,
you know, carbon dioxide as plant food, yada, yada,
yada, all this sort of stuff is just means
people who should be allowed nowhere near AAA chemistry
lab or a physics lab are making decisions about
chemists and chemistry and physics about which they know
nothing. And this is the real uh dilemma. The
people who know what they're talking about aren't being
listened to. And that's why seeing climate sciences like
Peter Calamus locking himself to the door of shell
and, and, and gluing themselves to glass windows to
make a point about it where this was scientific
rebellion, the joint Extinction rebellion and so on. They're
aware of the forces we're unleashing and they're terrified.
Now, the thing is if the experts are terrified
and the amateurs are complacent, then it's vitally important.
You have the experts at the wheel of the
ship, not the amateurs. Who do we have the
amateurs?
Mhm. So let me ask you just one last
question to perhaps try, went on a more positive
note. I mean, I, I'm not sure to what
extent you are able to be optimistic in this
sort of circumstances and looking at how we keep
doing things, but from an economics perspective, what would
you say would possibly be some of the best
solutions to help tackle climate change.
We have to treat it like World War Two
at the very minimum. Our entire economy is redirected
to attenuate and re the damages we've already done
and, and ameliorate the future consequences. That's not gonna
happen until such time as we start seeing serious
breakdowns. And once the serious breakdowns happen, we're gonna
be losing facilities, we need to actually do the
process. So I, I'm sorry, I can't be optimistic.
Uh I, I think uh the, the only optimism
I'd have is if, if, if, when the catastrophes
start rather than turning the economist, I, what do
we do now? Which is the mistake Obama made
back in 2009, we throw the economist at, ask
the scientist in and say, what the hell do
we do? And we then convince the public this
is actually existential, we're facing existential threats. It has
to be treated the same way that only happened
with the second World War after the, you know,
the defeat of Poland and uh the, the collapse
of France and the uh and the evacuations from
Dunkirk. In that situation, the British finally took the
threat of Nazis seriously and we had Winston Churchill
taking over and the four war effort began at
that point. Um That is an easier problem, a
far easier problem we face today. So we need
that sort of shift and I really don't see
any sign of it. We'd look at the debate
between uh Biden and Trump, which was, is a
farce in the first place. What's happening in the
British elections, what happened in the French elections? Uh
We simply are not even engaging with the scale
of danger we face. So the only optimism I
have and this is actually sounds rather ironical. We
need to have the cat the, the, the wake
the fuck up catastrophe happening sooner rather than later.
Because if it happens later, the momentum will be
that much greater. So we need something which I
have to put it this way. The only way
that we're gonna the West, which is the dominant
power on the planet will take this seriously is
lots of white people die in a climate catastrophe.
So we need 20 or 30 million Texans to
die because of a wet bult catastrophe where, where
the isolated grid, power grid, it has breaks down
any air conditioning fails and only those with Teslas
survive. Um Then Yep. OK. Then America might wake
up. It won't have Texas anymore, but it would
have real, real realism about the dangers we face
something that's necessary.
Well, so just before we go, doctor Kim, uh
the book is again Rebuilding Economics from the top
down. Would you like to tell people where they
can find your book and the rest of your
work on the internet?
Um That book is still in, in process of
being published by a Hungarian company. So I got
the OK to publish extracts from it on my
Patreon and substack pages. So if you go to
uh Triple W patreon.com/prof Steve Keen or Prof Steve
keen.substack.com, they'll find extracts from the, from the book
uh in those sites. Uh I've also just signed
a contract with polity uh books, which I'll hopefully
finish by March of next year and hopefully come
out in July. And the title of that, the
working title of that book is How Economics Will
Destroy capitalism. And that will give the same sort
of arguments I given from economics to the top
down, but basically reverse the direction. So in economics
from the top down, I go through all the
flaws in economic theory and then finish off with
the, the, the garbage they've written on climate change
with this other book. I'm gonna start with the
garbage on climate change. And then for people who
have never read Economics before, the question will be
how On Earth is this stuff ever published there?
Then after that point, I'll go through and explain
how delusional economics is in general and how it
led to these critical delusions over climate change. So,
Patreon and subtract, that's the main answer.
Yeah, I'm leaving links to that in the description
of the interview and doctor Ken. Thank you so
much for the fascinating conversation. I really loved it.
So, thank you for taking the time to do
this.
Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you. For watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Kel Matthew
Whitten. B are no wt Ho Erica LJ Condors
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel
Stormer, Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H
her meal and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear Ro Ro Diego, Jan
Punter. Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi, NA Me, Gary G Alman, Sam of Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTD and W Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radis Mark Kemple Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris to
Kimberley Johnson. Benjamin Gilbert Jessica, Noi Linda Brendan, Nicholas
Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George Katis, Valentine Steinman Perras,
Kate Von Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud
Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings
David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers is our
web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard N
Cortes Dixon Bendik Mueller, Thomas Rumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian
Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.